.. _maw-002.rst:

#########
PrintLots
#########

:date: 2016-11-28 18:20
:category: Data Struct & Algo
:tags: c, singly-linked-list, maw
:summary: MAW 3.2

*******
Problem
*******
       
Today, I finished the problem 3.2. The question is following:

  You are given a linked list, L, and another linked list, P, containing
  integers sorted in ascending order. The operation ``PrintLots(L,P)``
  will print the elements in L that are in positions specified by P.
  For instance, if P = 1,3,4,6, the first, third, fourth, and sixth elements
  in L are printed. Write the procedure ``PrintLots(L,P)``. You should
  use the basic list operations. What is the running time of your procedure?

********
Solution
********

.. code-block:: c
   :linenos:
      
    void
    printLots(List L, List P)
    {
      Pos dummyP, dummyL; // creates dummy nodes to traverse the list
      int i = 0, idx, outofelement;

      dummyP = P->Next;
      dummyL = L->Next;

      while (dummyP != NULL)
      {
        idx = dummyP->Element;
        if (idx >= 0)
        {
          // if the idx is larger or equal to where the dummyL currently is
          // we don't want to reset the dummyL to the very beginning of
          // the list L again to redo the traverse.
          if (idx < i)
          {
            dummyL = L->Next;
            i = 0;
          }
          for(; i < idx; i++)
          {
            if (dummyL->Next != NULL)
            {
              dummyL = dummyL->Next;
            }
            else
            {
              outofelement = 1;
              break;
            }
          }
          if (outofelement == 1)
          {
            printf("No element in position %d, ", idx);
          }
          else{
            printf("%d, ", dummyL->Element);
          }
        }
        else
        {
          exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
        }
        outofelement = 0;
        dummyP = dummyP->Next;
      }
    }

The problem isn't hard to solve. However, to get things right, I need to develop several test cases.
Let's develop a solution that can handle more general situation. In other words, linked list, P, doesn't
necessarily contain integers sorted in ascending order. Here are test cases I developed::

  L: 23, 44, 45, 57, 89, -1

  P:  1, 3, 4, 5          <--- normal case
      1, 3, 4, 6          <--- there is no sixth element in L
      1, 3, 4, 6, 7       <--- there is no sixth, seventh element in L
      6, 7, 3, 1          <--- there is no sixth, seventh element in L, but have third, first element
      6, 2, 7, 1          <--- a no element (6th) followed by a existing element (2nd)
     -9, 1, 3, 4          <--- negative integer from P appears at the beginning
      1, 2, 4, -10        <--- negative integer from P appears at the end

The code presented above handles all these different situations. In addition, if the integers presented in P
are actually in ascending order, we want to take advantage of this piece of information. That's why we check
``if (idx < i)``. We don't want to reset the traverse ptr (i.e. ``dummyL``) every single time. In other words,
if the number in P is actually ascending, we want to move the traver ptr from its current pos instead of reset.

**********
C related
**********

- When I compose this post, I'm actually thinking of if ``if (idx >= 0)`` is necessary. In other words, if C
  supports the array element access using negative index, then we shouldn't use ``exit`` to handle.
  Luckily, C doesn't support this feature. In fact, C allows you to access the element using negative index,
  but that is actually a out of bound access and C won't complain about this. However, whate exactly you get
  is random. That is called "undefined behavior".

